---
title: "MATH 303 2022WT2"
subtitle: "[Back](/content/exam)"
header-includes: |
    <style>
        details {
            color: blue;
        }
    </style>
---

## Question 1

Consider a Markov chain with states $\{0,1,2,\ldots\}$ and transition probabilities
$p_{ii} = p_{i,i+1}$ for all states $i$ and $p_{i0} = \frac{1}{3}$ for $i > 0$.

(a) Is the chain irreducible? No justification needed.

(b) What is the period of the chain? Prove your answer.

(c) Is state 100 recurrent? Prove your answer.

## Question 2

A machine is either working or broken on any day.
At each morning, if the machine was working the day before,
there is a probability $p$ of the machine of breaking at the start of the day.
Otherwise, a technician shows up and repairs the machine with probability $1/2$.

(a) What is the 1-step transition matrix for this chain?

(b) Find the fraction of time that the machine is working.

(c) If the machine is broken, it gets replaced with probability $1/2$.
On average, how many times does the machine gets replaced?

## Question 3

Customers arrive to a restaurant with rate $1$.
Served by some time $U\sim Unif[0, 1]$.

(a) I forgot

(b) 3 customers arrive in the interval $(0, 3)$.
What is the probability that none of them arrive in $(0, 1)$.

(c) Let $\tilde{N}(7)$ be the number of customers served in the first 7 hours.
Name the distribution and parameters of $\tilde{N}(7)$.

## Question 4

Let $X\sim \mbox{Exp}(\lambda)$, $Y\sim \mbox{Exp}(\mu)$.
What is

(a) Forgot

(b) Forgot

(c) Find the expected value of the maximum of $X$ and $Y$.

## Question 5

Forgot

## Question 6

Forgot

## Question 7

Forgot

## Question 8

Forgot

## Question 9

Consider a daycare with $3$ babies and $1$ caretaker.
Each sleeping baby wakes up and starts crying at a rate of $1$.
When 1 baby wakes up and starts crying, there is a probability of $1/2$
for one other baby to also start crying.
The caretaker calms the baby down and set them to sleep at a rate of $4$.

(a) What is the intensity matrix for this chain?

(b) Does this chain satisfy the detailed balance equations?

(c) Without any computation, justify why the limiting probabilities exist.

(d) Find the limiting probabilities.
